Delphinoidea is the largest group of toothed whales with 66 genera in 6 families. The largest living member of the superfamily is the killer whale, which can reach 6 tonnes, while the smallest, Commerson's Dolphin, is also the smallest living cetacean.

Taxonomy
Superfamily Delphinoidea
Family †Albireonidae  Genus Albireo    Family Delphinidae Subfamily Delphininae Genus Delphinus  Genus Lagenodelphis  Genus Sousa  Genus Stenella (syn. Clymenia, Micropia, Fretidelphis, Prodelphinus)  Genus Tursiops   Subfamily Lissodelphininae Genus Cephalorhynchus (syn. Eutropia)  Genus Lissodelphis (syn. Tursio, Leucorhamphus)   Subfamily Orcininae Genus † Arimidelphis  Genus Feresa  Genus Globicephala (syn. Sphaerocephalus, Globiceps, Globicephalus)  Genus Grampus (syn. Grampidelphis, Grayius)  Genus † Hemisyntrachelus  Genus Orcaella  Genus Orcinus (syn. Orca, Ophysia, Gladiator)  Genus Peponocephala  Genus Pseudorca (syn. Neorca)   Subfamily Stenoninae Genus † Astadelphis  Genus Sotalia (syn. Tucuxa)  Genus Steno (syn. Glyphidelphis, Stenopontistes)   Subfamily incertae sedis Genus † Anacharsis  Genus † Australodelphis  Genus Lagenorhynchus (syn. Electra, Sagmatias)    Family †Kentriodontidae Subfamily Kentriodontinae Genus Belonodelphis  Genus Delphinodon  Genus Incacetus  Genus Kentriodon (syn. Grypolithax)  Genus Macrokentriodon  Genus Microphocaena  Genus Rudicetus  Genus Tagicetus   Subfamily Lophocetinae Genus Hadrodelphis  Genus Liolithax  Genus Lophocetus   Subfamily Pithanodelphininae Genus Atocetus  Genus Leptodelphis  Genus Pithanodelphis  Genus Sophianacetus (syn. Mediocris)   Subfamily incertae sedis Genus Sarmatodelphis  Genus Kampholophos    Family Monodontidae Subfamily Delphinapterinae Genus Delphinapterus  Genus † Denebola   Subfamily Monodontinae Genus Monodon    Family † Odobenocetopsidae Genus Odobenocetops   Family Phocoenidae Subfamily Phocoeninae Genus † Australithax  Genus † Lomacetus  Genus † Loxolithax  Genus Neophocaena  Genus Phocoena   Subfamily Phocoeninae Genus Phocoenoides  Genus † Piscolithax (syn. Piscorhynchus)  Genus † Salumiphocaena   Subfamily incertae sedis Genus † Haborophocoena  Genus † Numataphocoena  Genus † Septemriocetus    Familia incertae sedis Genus † Delphinavus  Genus † Graamocetus  Genus † Lamprolithax  Genus † Miodelphis  Genus † Nannolithax  Genus † Oedolithax  Genus † Oligodelphis  Genus † Palaeophocaena  Genus † Platylithax  Genus † Protodelphinus  Genus † Sinanodelphis  

